# Cognitive Sovereignty Mesh Widget PRD (Hexagonal, Mesh Layered)

### TL;DR

Frontend mesh widgets operationalize cognitive sovereignty, authorship
visibility, and cultural adaptation at the user level. Key panels and
overlays enable CSI/FSM scoring, mode selection, HR consent, reflective
prompts, and compliance status. Every widget adapter is tightly coupled
to backend OpenAPI contracts, supporting real-time status updates and a
CI-validated test matrix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Goals

### Business Goals

- Accelerate enterprise adoption of sovereignty-aware, agentic workflows
  through intuitive, embeddable mesh widgets.

- Enable organizations to meet compliance and audit objectives by making
  sovereignty, authorship, and consent visible and actionable for every
  user.

- Reduce risk of regulatory breach or user trust erosion with real-time
  overlays, disclosure, and consent management.

- Provide competitive differentiation via deep cultural adaptability and
  sovereignty-first UX patterns.

### User Goals

- Help users understand and adjust their agency mode (manual, hybrid,
  auto-assist) at every workflow touchpoint.

- Surface cognitive sovereignty scores (CSI) so users can track
  authorship, transparency, and consent risks in real time.

- Empower users to give or deny HR/compliance consent with clear,
  reversible choices before sharing sensitive information.

- Offer culturally adapted interfaces, language, and reflection prompts
  that match organizational and personal preferences.

- Alert and guide users during policy drift, version mismatches, or
  compliance-required manual review.

### Non-Goals

- Will not provide fully automated agent decisions without explicit user
  intervention for regulated or critical tasks.

- Does not replace core backend sovereignty engines or business
  logic—focus is strictly on mesh widget UX and integration.

- Out of scope: Analytics dashboards for non-sovereignty features, deep
  external marketplace integrations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## User Stories

**Knowledge Worker**

- As a knowledge worker, I want to see my CSI score and current
  sovereignty mode so I can decide when to take control.

- As a knowledge worker, I want reflection prompts when sovereignty gets
  low so I can regain authorship.

- As a knowledge worker, I want to set cultural preferences so my
  experience matches my working style.

- As a knowledge worker, I want to review consent before any HR or
  sensitive attribute is shared.

**HR/Compliance Admin**

- As an HR admin, I want to be alerted when a user denies consent or
  triggers a sovereignty violation, so I can coordinate review or
  remediation.

- As an HR admin, I want to review manual review requests and log
  outcomes for compliance.

**Manager**

- As a manager, I want to see aggregate sovereignty metrics for my team,
  so I can track adoption and intervene as necessary.

- As a manager, I want to set organizational policy defaults for
  sovereignty mode, consent frequency, and reflection prompts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Functional Requirements

- **Panel Group: Main Sovereignty Widgets (Priority: Must)**

  - CSI Status Panel: Shows score, bar, real-time status, and alerts.

  - Fluency–Sovereignty Mode Selector: Allows switching between manual,
    hybrid, and auto-assist modes; displays recommended mode.

  - Cultural Profile Manager: Lets users adjust cultural/organizational
    context and see resulting UI adaptations.

  - Reflection Prompt Overlay: On low CSI or as set by config, prompts
    user to reflect or confirm authorship.

  - Consent Modal: For all HR/sensitive attributes, blocks display and
    prompts for user consent.

  - Manual Review Panel: Surfaces when HR or compliance review is
    needed; enables nudge, comment, log.

  - Policy Dashboard: For managers/admins—shows org/team sovereignty
    metrics and policy status.

- **Adapter Group: Mesh Layer Interfaces (Priority: Must)**

  - DataAPIAdapterPort: Every widget fetches data via OpenAPI endpoint,
    strict version check, and caching.

  - ConsentAdapter: Handles gating, overlays, consent logic, logs all
    events.

  - CulturalProfileAdapter: Reads and updates cultural config; triggers
    UI adaptation.

  - Notification/TelemetryAdapter: Sends event telemetry, logs actions,
    escalates errors and violations.

- **Error, Drift, and Overlay Handling (Priority: Must)**

  - Each panel shows error banner/overlay on API or adapter error;
    disables widget on version drift.

  - Persistent retry overlay for offline or unrecoverable errors, with
    fallback data if available.

  - CI and Storybook test suite covers each adapter x scenario (pass,
    fail, offline, drift, a11y, version-mismatch, consent-denied, manual
    review, overlay).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## User Experience

**Entry Point & First-Time User Experience**

- Users discover widgets on workflow launch, dashboard, or embedded in
  their mesh-enabled tool.

- First load triggers CSI intro overlay; walk-through explains
  agency/sovereignty spectrum and cultural config.

- Cultural Profile Manager accessible from top bar; initial prompt on
  locale/culture mismatch.

**Core Experience**

- **Step 1:** User opens mesh widget; DataAPIAdapterPort fetches
  panel/state.

  - Loading spinner; disables UI if offline or version drift detected
    (overlay shown).

- **Step 2:** CSI Status Panel displays score, alert if low, and bar.
  Mode Selector shows current and recommended modes.

  - User can switch mode. Mode change triggers live panel adaptation and
    telemetry log.

  - Reflection Prompt Overlay appears if user enters risky mode or on
    config-triggered interval.

  - On HR/sensitive attribute, Consent Modal blocks panel; user chooses
    allow/deny (logged every time).

- **Step 3:** If manual review required (CSI critically low, consent
  denied, flagged by backend), Manual Review Panel overlays and guides
  user/admin.

  - All review actions and comments logged via TelemetryAdapter.

- **Step 4:** Policy Dashboard available for admin/manager personas,
  shows team/org aggregates and policy edit options.

- **Step 5:** All overlays, mode selectors, and panels adapt
  language/affordance to cultural profile and org config.

  - Cultural profile updates live-adapt UI with zero reload.

- **Step 6:** On version drift or incomplete API contract, widget
  disables itself and shows update overlay/notification.

**Advanced Features & Edge Cases**

- If user is offline: persistent retry UI, disables all
  consent/HR/manual review panels, caches last good state (up to 30m).

- If a11y check fails: disables panel, displays a11y issue overlay, logs
  to telemetry, triggers alert for investigation.

- On manual mode force or HR prompt: overlays guide user through
  restoration/mitigation flow.

- For non-default org/cultural configs: UI rebrands language,
  iconography, and prompt frequency based on settings.

**UI/UX Highlights**

- Consistent banner and modal styling; color-coded CSI and mode badges;
  responsive layout and keyboard access.

- Accessibility-first: all controls are screen-reader friendly,
  high-contrast, and fully keyboard navigable.

- All overlays and banners respect live cultural/locale switch without
  reload or loss of context.

- Click-to-inspect overlays for CSI breakdown, compliance prompts, and
  version or policy updates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Narrative

Imagine a product leader named Sara who is piloting Cognitive Mesh at a
multinational enterprise. Her team handles confidential data, and agents
automate many tasks, but company policy mandates full transparency and
user control.

Sara logs in and sees her CSI score front and center—her authorship is
high, but today's complex task pushes the system into hybrid mode. The
widgets’ interface updates: a highlighted banner suggests reflection
prompts to ensure she approves agentic suggestions. When approaching a
regulated data task, a consent modal appears, letting her explicitly
approve or deny agent recommendations before anything moves forward. All
her actions, as well as her cultural and organizational settings, adapt
the interface and prompt frequency on the fly.

As Sara’s CSI stays high, she feels ownership of the process, and knows
every choice is logged and auditable. Compliance officers can review
manual review logs and see a real-time dashboard of sovereignty events.
When policy updates, version drift overlays notify users and guide them
to the latest updates—never leaving sovereignty to chance.

Through these widgets, Sara’s enterprise accelerates productivity but
never loses the human-centered, compliance-assured edge that sets them
apart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Success Metrics

### User-Centric Metrics

- % of workflows with user-acknowledged CSI and explicit mode selection

- % reduction in sovereignty/authorship complaints

- NPS for sovereignty transparency and authorship empowerment

- Average intervention/recovery time from sovereignty violation prompt

### Business Metrics

- % user compliance with reflection and consent prompts

- Number of prevented HR or regulatory breaches via consent overlays

- Adoption rate of sovereignty-aware workflows per org/business unit

### Technical Metrics

- Widget P95 load <1s, error rate <0.5%, uptime >99.95%

- <1% version drift or incompatible panel disables per major release

- 100% CI/telemetry and consent event coverage

### Tracking Plan

- Event: Panel/widget load, mode switch, CSI update, consent
  granted/denied, reflection completed, manual review triggered, overlay
  shown, error/telemetry event, a11y failure, version drift,
  cultural/locale change

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Technical Considerations

### Technical Needs

- CSI, FSM, Consent, and Cultural adapters map directly to backend
  OpenAPI endpoints.

- All widgets/panels strictly check API contract and schema version
  before initializing UI or storing cache.

- Exponential, jittered retry for every API or backend error, with
  fallback overlays for persistent fail/offline.

- All event/consent logs shipped in real-time or batch per session, with
  correlationID and org/user metadata.

### Integration Points

- Mesh platform shell, backend sovereignty engine APIs, Azure
  identity/org registry, telemetric/event bus

### Data Storage & Privacy

- Panel state and cache TTL max 30m, wiped/invalidated on schema or
  version update.

- All consent, review, and cultural attribution events logged with
  SOC2/GDPR-compliant metadata and user ID.

- No sensitive HR/PII ever stored client-side post-session.

### Scalability & Performance

- Bundles <300kB, all panels <20MB memory, able to handle widget load
  for 10k+ concurrent org users.

- Live updates for configuration/cultural/locale switches without
  reload.

- Resilient to version upgrades, contract changes, and failover.

### Potential Challenges

- Preventing silent contract or version drift across backend and UI
  panels.

- Handling edge-case a11y/cultural misconfigurations, especially for
  multilingual or international orgs.

- Ensuring reflection/consent frequency does not fatigue advanced users
  while still meeting compliance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Milestones & Sequencing

### Project Estimate

- Medium: 2–4 weeks

### Team Size & Composition

- Small Team: 2–3 people total (Full-stack or frontend dev, UX/design
  lead, product/QA support as needed)

### Suggested Phases

**Phase 1: Widget Skeleton & Adapter Contracts (1 week)**

- Key Deliverables: Widget shell, all adapters stubbed, OpenAPI contract
  wiring, panel layout, basic localization.

- Dependencies: Backend API contract access, branding/theme tokens.

**Phase 2: Panel Implementation & Storybook Matrix (1 week)**

- Key Deliverables: CSI, Mode Selector, Consent, Reflection, Profile
  Manager, Policy Dashboard all live; Storybook and CI for all test
  cases, overlay patterns, and edge scenarios.

- Dependencies: Adapter stubs and core backend mocks.

**Phase 3: Consent, Manual Review & Compliance Integration (0.5–1
week)**

- Key Deliverables: All consent/manual review overlays; audit/telemetry
  hooks and logging; compliance/a11y overlays.

- Dependencies: HR/compliance workflow stubs; Policy manager/admin
  dashboard.

**Phase 4: Testing, CI, Version & Pattern Library (0.5–1 week)**

- Key Deliverables: Complete test coverage, pattern library
  documentation, CI/CD hooks and contract enforcement, version drift
  overlays/notifications, migration docs for rollout.

- Dependencies: Storybook coverage, CI harness, registry infra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
