# Impact-Driven AI Backend Architecture PRD

### Executive Summary

The backend architecture delivers APIs and intelligent services for
tracking real impact, modeling team culture, assessing psychological
safety, and enabling AI collaboration. Its goal is to produce measurable
business and community outcomes through scalable, reliable interfaces
for user-facing widgets integrated into the mesh platform.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Goals

### Business Goals

- Achieve clear improvements in team workflows and measure productivity
  gains across all teams eligible to use the mesh platform.

- Enable faster sharing and adoption of innovative, high-impact
  solutions and ideas both within and between organizations.

- Promote positive changes in organizational culture and safety by
  providing actionable insights and highlighting important trends.

- Provide platform APIs with high reliability, strong security, and
  scalable performance to support essential integrations for mesh
  clients, meeting enterprise standards for uptime and compliance.

### User Goals

- Enable teams to track and celebrate real impact and value creation,
  not just system usage

- Surface and amplify authentic passions, expertise, and culture,
  fostering deeper community alignment

- Equip users with tools for psychological safety, feedback, and risk
  mitigation in collaborative environments

- Ensure transparency and provenance for all AI-driven insights and
  automation across workflows

### Non-Goals

- Building or specifying the front-end widget/plugin code (this is
  handled in a separate PRD)

- Orchestrating bespoke AI/ML models not already covered in platform
  architecture

- Supporting “off-mesh” integrations with non-sanctioned third-party
  systems

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## User Stories

- **Mesh Platform Admin**

  - As a Platform Admin, I want to onboard a new organization, so that
    its impact and culture metrics are measured from day one.

  - As a Platform Admin, I want audit trails and control over API
    versioning, so that I can prove compliance and integration
    stability.

- **Business Lead**

  - As a Business Lead, I want to view a real-time dashboard of process
    impact, so that I can prioritize high-ROI initiatives.

  - As a Business Lead, I want to see cross-team champion discovery, so
    that I can foster organic knowledge transfer.

- **Team Member**

  - As a Team Member, I want my unique passions and experiences to shape
    my AI-augmented workflows, so that my work feels more meaningful.

  - As a Team Member, I want assurance that my feedback and concerns
    regarding psychological safety are heard and acted upon.

- **Mesh Plugin Developer**

  - As a Developer, I want reliable, stable APIs for event orchestration
    and measurement, so that I can focus on user experience.

  - As a Developer, I want detailed endpoint documentation and change
    notifications, so that my solutions don’t break when APIs evolve.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Functional Requirements

- **Impact Measurement Services** (Priority: Must)

  - **ImpactFirstMeasurementEngine**: /v1/measurement/impact

    - Tracks workflow augmentation events, virality of solutions,
      interaction depth, calendar coverage, and key business outcomes.

    - Acceptance: *Given* a user action routed through the workflow,
      *When* measurement is triggered, *Then* the event is logged,
      scored, and accessible in less than 500ms.

- **Passion and Culture Modeling** (Priority: Must)

  - **PassionDrivenAIOrchestrator**: /v1/orchestrator/passions

    - Parses user profiles, detects genuine passions, verifies
      authenticity, and matches users to relevant communities or
      initiatives.

    - Acceptance: *Given* an updated user profile, *When* orchestrator
      is invoked, *Then* passions and authenticity are scored, and a
      matchmaking action is proposed, with a full audit record.

- **Safety and Culture Health** (Priority: Must)

  - **PsychologicalSafetyCultureEngine**: /v1/pulse/safety

    - Tracks team and group health metrics, detects risk signals,
      forecasts cultural drift, and surfaces opportunities for learning
      or celebration.

    - Acceptance: *Given* a team’s ongoing interactions, *When* risk or
      positive trends emerge, *Then* a timely alert and recommended
      action are surfaced.

- **Humanity-First Enrichment** (Priority: Should)

  - **HumanityFirstEnrichmentEngine**: /v1/enrichment/humanity

    - Captures and blends unique experiences/context, amplifying
      individuality and the “human fingerprint” within team workflows.

    - Acceptance: *Given* a request for enrichment, *When* unique inputs
      are available, *Then* the response is personalized and contains
      provenance tags.

- **Collaborative Intelligence APIs** (Priority: Could)

  - **Multi-AgentCollabAPIs**: /v1/collab/agents

    - Allows user- or app-initiated orchestration of creative, critical,
      synthesis, and facilitator “AI agents” for group problem-solving.

    - Acceptance: *Given* a multi-agent task is launched, *When* agents
      complete their pipelines, *Then* outcomes are synced with audit
      summary and surfaced to calling client.

Each of these features supports full endpoint documentation, schema
versioning, unit/integration tests, and a checklist of security/consent
requirements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## User Experience

**Entry Point & First-Time User Experience**

- Organization Admins invite users, who are onboarded via secure API
  registration.

- Mesh widgets (outside the scope of this backend PRD) call backend
  endpoints through authenticated App registrations.

**Core Experience**

- **Step 1:** Widget (e.g., “Impact Dashboard”) authenticates and
  requests latest impact data.

  - If API token or SSO handshake fails, clear error is returned.

  - Success response includes calculated metrics, confidence, and
    provenance hashes.

- **Step 2:** Widget or process submits new workflow event for
  measurement.

  - Validated at endpoint, securely logged, and processed for scoring in
    real time.

  - Errors in payload validation produce descriptive error messages with
    correction hints.

- **Step 3:** On-demand or scheduled passion/culture analysis is
  triggered.

  - Engine parses relevant profiles, discovers/updates matches, and
    returns signed payloads for UI use.

- **Step 4:** Psychological safety pulse polled or streamed by mesh
  plugin.

  - Service provides both aggregated trends and actionable event
    records.

  - Safety alerts are tagged as “urgent,” “routine,” or “celebration,”
    per policy.

- **Step 5:** Any agent orchestration launched by clients follows a
  sandwich pattern:

  - Input/goal submission → orchestrator executes backend pipeline →
    returns result artifact and audit provenance.

**Advanced Features & Edge Cases**

- APIs handle rate limit excesses with 429s and detailed back-off
  headers.

- All error states include root cause, friendly display string, and
  correlation IDs.

- If backend lags/loses data—widgets display “Last fetched X mins ago”
  and offer manual retry.

- DR/Failover: Primary endpoints automatically reroute to backup region
  on failure.

**UI/UX Highlights**

- All endpoints expose consent and privacy hooks—downstream widget must
  reflect these clearly.

- API responses always embed origin, timestamp, and
  confidence/provenance on computed data.

- Accessibility, i18n, and time zone normalization are standard in all
  timestamped payloads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Narrative

At the heart of the Cognitive Mesh, organizations face the challenge
that traditional measurement tools only capture activity—not true
impact. Employees crave workflows that celebrate real outcomes and
amplify what makes each person unique, all while feeling safe to take
creative risks. The Impact-Driven AI Backend Architecture transforms
this landscape by moving beyond mere logins: it orchestrates
measurements that matter, identifies and nurtures authentic passions,
and keeps a finger on the pulse of every team’s culture and
psychological safety.

Leaders finally see not just who logs in, but who actually moves the
needle. Team members feel recognized for their unique
contributions—passion isn’t just a buzzword, but a visible, amplifiable
signal. Risk and fatigue don’t go undetected; the system anticipates and
calls for celebration or intervention well before crises arise. Above
all, every insight and recommendation comes with full provenance,
transparency, and user control. The backend’s robust architecture
ensures every client, widget, and user across the mesh benefits from
real, actionable intelligence—driving sustainable business and human
outcomes at every level.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Success Metrics

### User-Centric Metrics

- Adoption rate of widgets consuming impact/culture APIs

- User satisfaction with passion-matching accuracy (via CSAT or pulse
  surveys)

- Time-to-feedback on psychological safety alerts

### Business Metrics

- Demonstrated lift in critical workflow adoption as proven by impact
  engine events

- Rate of viral spread for high-value solutions identified by the
  measurement engine

- Quantity and velocity of cross-team innovation proposals

### Technical Metrics

- API endpoint uptime (goal: ≥99.9% for all production services)

- Average request/response latency (<500ms for read, <700ms for
  write/compute)

- Percentage of events processed within SLOs (goal: 99% within 1s)

- Audit event consistency and trace completeness

### Tracking Plan

- Track every endpoint call (API, timestamp, widget/global context,
  org/tenant ID)

- Log each error or exception by type, payload, and affected user (with
  correlation ID)

- Monitor passion/orchestration and safety engine requests versus
  successful completions

- Instrument workflow augmentation and solution virality events with
  OpenTelemetry tags

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Technical Considerations

### Technical Needs

- Central orchestration platform with secure API gateway,
  authentication, and fine-grained rate limiting

- ImpactFirstMeasurementEngine, PassionDrivenAIOrchestrator,
  PsychologicalSafetyCultureEngine, HumanityFirstEnrichmentEngine,
  Multi-AgentCollabAPIs—each running as microservices with observable,
  documented public interfaces

- Event streaming and pub/sub support for real-time or batch processing

- Integration with platform’s secrets manager for config and credential
  handling

### Integration Points

- All mesh user widgets and plugins as primary API clients

- Authentication broker (SSO/OAuth)

- System event bus and monitoring/telemetry frameworks

- Enterprise logging and audit systems

- Internal or external API consumers, subject to access policy

### Data Storage & Privacy

- All PII and sensitive org data encrypted at rest and in transit (TLS
  1.2+/AES-256)

- Event logs, audit trails, and provenance records retained as per data
  retention/sovereignty policy

- Full GDPR/SOC2/CCPA compliance; explicit per-tenant boundaries and
  configurable data residency/geofencing

### Scalability & Performance

- Auto-scaling support for variable org/tenant loads (hundreds to
  millions of events/day)

- Load balancing and DR/failover architecture with RPO/RTO as specified
  in NFR appendix

- Support for both orchestration spikes and prolonged analysis jobs

### Potential Challenges

- Achieving low-latency, high-availability at large scale without
  sacrificing auditability

- Managing cross-service dependencies for multi-agent or “sandwich”
  orchestration flows

- Ensuring “drifting” signals (impact, passion, safety) remain accurate
  and actionable

- Updating API contracts while minimizing client/mesh widget disruption

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Milestones & Sequencing

### Project Estimate

- Medium effort: 2–4 weeks for MVP, assuming modular codebase and high
  alignment with widget PRD.

- Full integration, rollout, and operational hardening: 4–8 weeks total.

### Team Size & Composition

- Small, agile team: 2–3 core engineers (backend/API, orchestration), 1
  product owner, 1 designer (part-time advisory for API/UX traceability
  and provenance), 1 SRE-on-call for DR/deployment.

### Suggested Phases

**Phase 1: Planning & API Contract Finalization (0.5 weeks)**

- Deliverables: Final API schemas, documentation, and OpenAPI spec
  reviewed by widget/UX teams

- Dependencies: Input from mesh widget PRD, design on data structures

**Phase 2: Core Engine Development (1.5 weeks)**

- Deliverables: ImpactFirstMeasurementEngine,
  PassionDrivenAIOrchestrator, PsychologicalSafetyCultureEngine MVPs
  with endpoints live in dev/test

- Dependencies: Secure config, authentication infra readiness

**Phase 3: Integration & Orchestration (1 week)**

- Deliverables: Orchestration flows, agent API, sandwich pipeline
  readiness, connected with at least one pilot widget

- Dependencies: Pilot widget/plugin team coordination

**Phase 4: Compliance, Observability & DR (0.5 week)**

- Deliverables: Telemetry, audit logging, rate limiting, DR/backup,
  observability dashboards

- Dependencies: Platform security/compliance policies

**Phase 5: Feedback, Hardening & Launch (1 week)**

- Deliverables: Integrated platform and widget QA, performance testing,
  external beta launch

- Dependencies: Stakeholder and beta tester alignment

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reference: All API and service implementations must adhere to the
“Global NFR” appendix for security, observability, rate limits,
auditability, incident response, and platform DR. See separate NFR
document for policy details and compliance checklists.*
